ONLINE ATTENDANCE SYSTEM
ABSTRACT:
This document is meant for describing all the features and procedures that
were followed while developing the system.This document specially mentions the
details of the project how it was developed, the primary requirement, as well as
various features and functionaries of the project and the procedures followed in
achieving these objectives.
Attendance System forms the lifeline of the institute to manage the STUDENTS
and maintain their records. It is very essential for an Institute to handle the records
and their scale. It is very useful for an Institute to test its student attendance
continuously for their mutual development. In this faculty can have separate login ID
& password to make the students attendance. By this faculty can provide the
attendance to the respective class on hourly basis. The attendance will we provide
only if the student is present in the class. And each student will be provided with
username and password. They can also check their attendance for each hour according
to their time table and how many periods they were absent to the class can also check
by students.The objective of the student attendance management system is to reduce
the time that is consumed when attendance is taken manually. Unlike the manual
process, an online system easily helps management to analyze student’s attendance
details as per requirement. A detailed summary of student attendance can be obtained
in an instant.
ONLINE ATTENDANCE SYSTEM
INTRODUCTION:
This system developed will reduce the manual work and avoid redundant data.
By maintaining the attendance manually, then efficient reports cannot be generated.
The system can generate efficient weekly,consolidate report based on the attendance.
As the attendances are maintained in registers it has been a tough task for admin and
staff to maintain for long time. Instead the software can keep long and retrieve the
information when needed.
Purpose:
The purpose of developing attendance management system is to computerized
the tradition way of taking attendance. Another purpose for developing this software
is to generate the report automatically at the end of the session or in the between of
the session.
Scope:
The scope of the project is the system on which the software is installed, i.e.
the project is developed as a prototype application, and it will work on a particular
platform. But later on the project can be modified to operate it on online Attendance
Management System.
ONLINE ATTENDANCE SYSTEM
RELATED WORKS:
The Existing system is a manual entry for the students. Here the attendance
will be carried out in the hand written registers. It will be a tedious job to maintain the
record for the user. The human effort is more here. The retrieval of the information is
not as easy as the records are maintained in the hand written registers. This
application requires correct feed on input into the respective field. Suppose the wrong
inputs are entered, the application resist to work. so the user find it difficult to use.
A manual register is kept and monthly attendance is calculated making
process error prone. Report generation of presence / absence for a few days is very
tough. In attendance register, there are more chances of error during calculation on
presence .Staff has to keep record of attendance in book which is time consuming and
less secure. Eligibility criteria for student examination process has to be calculated
according to the student attendance manually which is a really big process and time
consuming.
Till date the records of any attendance are done by manual and stored in the
internal memory of the particular device.so, this may lead to corrupt by any kind of
system viruses. So, to escape from this problem we are using database in this project.
In this we can store data in cloud. So here we have auto update on cloud and any kind
of virus cannot destroy the data and the data will be safe for a long time by this we
can retrieve the data by using any device from any place with the help of internet.
ONLINE ATTENDANCE SYSTEM
PROBLEM STATEMENT :
This developed system will reduce the manual work and avoid redundant
data. By maintaining the attendance manually, then efficient reports cannot be
generated. The system can generate efficient weekly,consolidate report based on the
attendance. As the attendances are maintained in registers it has been a tough task for
admin and staff to maintain for long time. Instead the software can keep long and
retrieve the information when needed.
PROJECT OVERVIEW :
Attendance Management System basically has two main modules for proper
functioning 1. Admin module is has rights for creating any new entry of faculty and
student details. 2.User has a rights of making daily attendance, generating report.
Attendance report can be taken by given details of student details, date, class.
MODULE DESCRIPTION:
The system should be designed in such a way that only authorized people
should be allowed to access some particular modules. The records should be modified
by only administrators and no one else. The user should always be in control of the
application and not the vice versa. The user interface should be consistent so that the
user can handle the application with ease and speed. The application should be
visually, conceptually clear.
Attendance details:
It will be makes to the attendance database all students.Entered attendance to
stored in the database subject ,period wise into the particular date. It will help to get
report by weekly and consolidate of the attendance.
ONLINE ATTENDANCE SYSTEM
FLOW CHART :
FACULTY
STUDENT
ATTENDENCE
UPDATE
VIEW ATTENDENCE
LOGIN
LOGIN
VIEW ATTENDENCE
FURTHER MODIFICATIONS
LOGOUT
ONLINE ATTENDANCE SYSTEM
PROPOSED SYSTEM :
To overcome the drawbacks of the existing system, the proposed system has
been evolved. This project aims to reduce the paper work and saving time to generate
accurate results from the student’s attendance. The system provides with the best user
interface. The efficient reports can be generated by using this proposed system.
Advantages of Proposed System :
* It is trouble-free to use.
*It is a relatively fast approach to enter attendance
* Is highly reliable, approximate result from user
* Best user Interface
* Efficient reports
FEASIBILITY STUDY :
Feasibility analysis begins once the goals are defined. It starts by generating
broad possible solutions, which are possible to give an indication of what the new
system should look lime. This is where creativity and imagination are used. Analysts
must think up new ways of doing things- generate new ideas. There is no need to go
into the detailed system operation yet. The solution should provide enough
information to make reasonable estimates about project cost and give users an
indication of how the new system will fit into the organization. It is important not to
exert considerable effort at this stage only to find out that the project is not
worthwhile or that there is a need significantly change the original goal. Feasibility of
a new system means ensuring that the new system, which we are going to implement,
is efficient and affordable. There are various types of feasibility to be determined.
They are,
Economically Feasibility:
Development of this application is highly economically feasible. The only
thing to be done is making an environment with an effective supervision. It is cost
effective in the sense that has eliminated the paper work completely. The system is
also time effective because the calculations are automated which are made at the end
of the month or as per the user requirement.
ONLINE ATTENDANCE SYSTEM
Technical feasibility :
The technical requirement for the system is economic and it does not use any
other additional Hardware and software. Technical evaluation must also assess
whether the existing systems can be upgraded to use the new technology and whether
the organization has the expertise to use it. Install all upgrades framework into
the .Net package supported widows based application. this application depends on
Microsoft office and intranet service ,database. Enter their attendance and generate
report to excel sheet.
Operational Feasibility :
The system working is quite easy to use and learn due to its simple but
attractive interface. User requires no special training for operating the system.
Technical performance include issues such as determining whether the system can
provide the right information for the Department personnel student details, and
whether the system can be organized so that it always delivers this information at the
right place and on time using intranet services. Acceptance revolves around the
current system and its personnel.
SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS :
HARDWARE REQUIREMENTS :(Minimum Requirement)
* Minimum RAM :- 8GB
* Hard Disk :- 1TB
* Processor :- Intel Core i7(8th gen) or AMD RYZEN(R5)
SOFTWARE REQUIREMENTS (minimum Requirement)
* Operating system : Windows10
* Java JDK : jdk 1.8 or Higher
* Netbeans : 11.0 or Higher
ONLINE ATTENDANCE SYSTEM
STEPS TO OPEN PROJECT :
* Install jdk 1.8 or higher and set the path.
* Install Netbeans 11.0 or higher.
* Open the project using “ctrl+shift+o” in NETBEANS.
* Resolve the issues with respective requirements.
* Add jcalender, Derbyclient, Derbynet, rs2xml and Derbydriver jar files
to Library.
* Create Database with the user name : “vijay” password : “3103”.
* Create tables according to the source code provided in the file.
Algorithm or Pseudo code:
https://github.com/the-damrla/OnlineAttendance..git
(you can refer to this for further details of code section)
PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS :
Performance testing is designed to test the run-time performance of software
within the context of an integrated system. Performance testing occurs throughout all
steps in the testing process. Even at the unit level, the performance of an individual
module may be assessed as white-box tests are conducted. This project reduce
attendance table, codes. it will generate report as fast as the button pressed, it creates
the reports and analysis within milliseconds because the codes are written and ceased
with perfection.
This project has gone through the different types of testing in the time of
building. So the problems that are generating in the run time or compile time were
nullified at it’s initial stage. Even after the completion of complete code this project
has tested with different types of entries to test it’s efficiency so whatever the
problems or errors that are generated and the problems which did not solve at its
initial stage are solved at its testing stage. So whatever you are able to see in this code
is perfectly working and there are add-on to this project which are under construction
stage will be updated to this project very soon.
ONLINE ATTENDANCE SYSTEM
FACULTY INTERFACE
EXIT
LOGIN
Reset
Sets everything to selected one Submits selected attendance Clears everything
ONLINE ATTENDANCE SYSTEM
When we click on their names will clear everything that we made Calender
their name,number and photo(ID)
will be visible to us(Faculty)
Can select the date accordingly
ONLINE ATTENDANCE SYSTEM
CONFORMATION BOX of Present day attendance(just to check)
Submits attendance Can view the attendance that is done till date
This tells the success of data entry
LOGOUT from session
Can view attendance according to the date LOGOUT from session
ONLINE ATTENDANCE SYSTEM
STUDENT INTERFACE
LOGIN ERROR message when wrong details entered EXIT
LOGOUT change password Can view their Attendance
ONLINE ATTENDANCE SYSTEM
Conclusion :
To conclude, Project works like a component which can access all the
databases and picks up different functions. It overcomes the many limitations
incorporated in the attendance. Easy implementation Environment generate report
flexibly.
Scope for future development :
The project has a very vast scope in future. The project can be implemented on
intranet in future. Project can be updated in near future as and when requirement for
the same arises, as it is very flexible in terms of expansion. With the proposed
software of database Space Manager ready and fully functional the client is now able
to manage and hence run the entire work in a much better, accurate and error free
manner. The following are the future scope for the project.
* Discontinue of particular student eliminate potential attendance.
*Individual Attendance system With photo using Student login.
References:
1. Programming with Java - E Balaguruswamy
2. Student attendance management System - By KalaisankaranB ( MCET - Pollachi )
3. Lectures by D J Oamaen on java Swings
4. SQL tutorials by sourcecode
